We live in a time in which the concept of Heimat is very important to many people. They look around in this ever-changing, ever-faster-spinning world, and grasp for something solid, so that they are not swept away by the waves of time. But in this case, does this term or this understanding of Heimat not bring us more problems than it can solve? The suggestion that Heimat is something inherent, which dwells within all people, seems to me more fateful than helpful. Especially in a time in which nothing remains standing for long, or rather is allowed to remain standing, and is instead subjugated by the perpetual progress of the world.

When one thinks of one's Heimat, some things might immediately come to mind. For some it is the farmhouse that stands somewhere in the countryside, in a hidden valley, far from civilization. For some it might also be a city in which they grew up. But if one thinks a bit longer about the concept of Heimat, it quickly becomes apparent that it is not all that easy to explain what Heimat actually is. Heimat can also be something totally abstract. For those who have been displaced, the concept of Heimat can simply be associated with people; it does not have to be based on any physical constructs.

For Adorno, in his work "Minima Moralia", written in exile, we see that Heimat requires the mother tongue of the inhabitant in order to be any kind of Heimat at all. He writes: "*Every intellectual in emigration, without any exception, is damaged, and does well to recognize this himself [...] He lives in an environment that must remain incomprehensible to him, [...] he is constantly in error. [...] His language is expropriated and the historical dimension from which he drew his strength is cut off.[^1]*" When he writes that his environment *must* remain incomprehensible to him, the question arises quite openly: why? I believe the answer lies in a section of Hegel's famous work "Phenomenology of Spirit", namely in the fourth part of the book, "The Truth of Self-Certainty". Hegel writes here: "*Self-consciousness exists in and for itself when, and by the fact that, it so exists for another; that is, it exists only in being acknowledged.[^2]*" We can also apply this principle to the culture of a people or tribe, since culture here functions as a kind of *supra-self-consciousness* of the people. By doing this, we see that it only exists insofar as it is foreign to another, to an outsider. It *is* only as something acknowledged. If all the cultures of the world belonged to one giant amalgam, indistinguishable, then one could no longer acknowledge them at all, for there would be nothing here to acknowledge, only the whole itself. They need to exclude outsiders in order to preserve their existence. At this point, however, I do not want to spend too much time on this topic, because we will return to it at a later point in the text.

Just over two years ago I emigrated, to a country that was almost completely, but not entirely, foreign to me. At the time I naturally left my country of origin without the intention of ever returning for the long term. At the time, however, I did not feel that the country I was leaving was a Heimat. Although I had spent my life up to that point there, I felt no emotional or spiritual connection. My family would certainly describe themselves as "compatriots" who belong to this country. However, we had no traditions of any kind. Life simply consisted of enduring the days that came relentlessly onward (they still do, in fact). However, this did not leave me lost and did not force me to simply hurl aimlessly through the world, but it left me without any fetters or any particularly strong desire to remain permanently in that country. Instead, it gave me the longing to find somewhere where I feel "at ease", what one might call a true "Heimat". I thought I had found this place, but with each new day that dawned, it slowly occurred to me: I had indeed found something else, insofar as I had the feeling of new freedom, but this feeling of belonging somewhere was still missing. I could choose new customs and habits here, allow myself free rein to select what I really want, only participate as I please. I also have a reasonable command of the language. Fluent, like one's mother tongue, it will probably never be, but to integrate myself sufficiently, it is quite adequate. In the worst case, if both of these camouflage techniques were to fail, I would always still have the excuse of being a "foreigner", insofar as I could simply admit that I do not originally come from this country and therefore am not obligated to those customs, that I am not even aware of them, a helpless fool condemned to wander unconsciously and lost through the world.

This is essential not only for my existence as a foreigner, but also for the existence of the native. He may well come from the country, know his way around here better than anyone else, but without the foreigner's admission that there is a certain culture here, of which he himself can know nothing, to whose rules he must adhere, the existence of the native's identity would be endangered. He needs the foreigner, as the master needs the bondsman, without whom his position as master could not exist[^3]. Furthermore, that admission grants the foreigner an elevation in perceived freedom. Although he must forfeit his position in this power hierarchy, by doing this he manages to tear himself away from the shackles of the native's culture; for his mistakes there is always an excuse to which he can reach. He can apologize for everything and nothing, as he deems necessary, and the possibility of choosing the new customs naturally also means that he is bound to nothing, obligated to nothing. He is free from those cultural rules, in the truest sense of the word[^4]. In this freedom, however, lies at the same time his unfreedom. Although he may learn all the rules, appropriate all the customs and habits, these only apply insofar as they are accepted by the natives. The choice to consider himself here in this country as a true native remains outside his sphere of power. He and his entire existence are inevitably subject to the native of the land, and without running the risk of destroying his existence, the native can show him no mercy. He must necessarily assert himself as master in this relationship. The only true freedom that remains for the foreigner in this relationship is the choice of the veil with which he conceals his identity or *non-identity*. He is condemned to spend his days in this country as an outsider, without any hope of reconciliation. He can only hide and defend himself, in the hope that he escapes undetected and can live out his life somewhat in peace.

These phenomena, however, do not apply to Heimat. However bleak the situation may look here for the foreigner, the choice of his Heimat rests with him and him alone. It cannot be dictated to him, no matter how hard one tries. Although the physical aspects of that Heimat could be taken from him by means of force, the metaphysical ones would continue to dwell within him. In this relationship between Heimat and inhabitant there need be no other. It requires only the inhabitant and that which he considers Heimat. This may consist of people, places, or even just a feeling that he carries within himself. Since Heimat dwells only within the person, it does not require the acknowledgment of the other in order to be. It does not have to be assimilated by another, but instead succeeds in remaining free from the chains of the master. In this respect, it is possible for every person on earth to form a Heimat for themselves, from what they think is right. They are not forced to fetter themselves to something that does not suit them, and they do not have to bow before anyone either.

Every person on earth therefore always has a hope of Heimat; the direction of all hope is solely Heimat; one must only allow oneself this hope. In a stanza of the poem "The Silesian Weavers" from the year 1844, Heinrich Heine wrote:

*A curse on the false fatherland,*  
*Where only shame and disgrace flourish,*  
*Where every flower is broken early,*  
*Where putrefaction and decay delight the worm –*  
     *We weave, we weave![^5]*

One could interpret here that although the weavers do not feel they are in the right place in their "false fatherland", they nevertheless weave on, in the hope that they may manage to fabricate a new Heimat for themselves from the fibers of their true being, that they can one day belong somewhere: a Heimat true to them. But who is really responsible for forging Heimat? To whom should this tremendously difficult task fall? If we assume, in the style of neoliberalism, the autonomy of all people and say that each person is only themselves responsible for the exhaustion of their Heimat, we see that it is impossible to create a single unique Heimat for each person that does not encroach upon the Heimat of another and thus can only lead to the tearing away of another's Heimat. Those conditions that are supposed to contribute to their true happiness, or at least give them the freedom to shape it as they wish, only lead into the bars of the prison from which they can never escape. They must be constantly vigilant, in the hope that no one comes to rob them of their Heimat. Since they must live here permanently in fear, we can deduce that they are not in any kind of Heimat. The person would then be cursed to live the rest of their life in misery, mourning the loss for which *they* alone bear the guilt. Only humanity as a whole can strive for Heimat. The weavers weave *together*, as a collective: "*We* weave". Heimat can therefore either be attainable for all people in the world or for no one. A person who steals Heimat from their kind can only thereby lose Heimat themselves. Adorno and Horkheimer wrote in their work "Dialectic of Enlightenment": "*of happiness without power, of reward without labor, of Heimat without boundary stone, of religion without myth.[^6]*" That is what all people on earth truly long for: Heimat. It can only be brought about when one frees it from those distinctions of objective, spatial existence; otherwise it is always doomed to failure. The only proof we need here to refute the myth that Heimat requires these objects is the fact that people who have never encountered these objects can also attain this state of Heimat, just like those who claim to need these objects. Their *presence* in the *absence* of these objects shows us that Heimat exists outside the realm of the objective; it overcomes it and transitions into an entirely metaphysical form. It is *in* and *for* itself. By its very nature, it is impossible to fetter its form in the merely physical. The alienation of Heimat that occurs when one attempts to locate it in mere objects is one of the greatest obstacles for humanity on its way to Heimat. Ernst Bloch further wrote in his monumental work "The Principle of Hope":

*"Man still lives everywhere in prehistory; indeed everything and everyone still stands before the creation of the world, as a proper one. The real genesis is not at the beginning but at the end, and it only begins to begin when society and existence become radical, that is, grasp themselves at the root. The root of history, however, is the working, creating human being, who transforms and overtakes the given circumstances. Once he has grasped himself and established what is his without alienation and estrangement in real democracy, something arises in the world that shines into everyone's childhood and in which no one has yet been: Heimat.[^7]"*

We see here that Heimat is not something that dwells latently within the person. One must create it oneself. It cannot be imposed upon the person. Moreover, a world in which the person is oppressed can offer them no Heimat. Heimat for Bloch here consists of memories of the past and at the same time hope. The death of the *Urheimat*, which one perceives in one's childhood as true Heimat, precedes the emergence of true Heimat. Put differently: the death of the *Urheimat* conditions the birth of the new, self-created one. But if the person is incapable of processing the loss of the *Urheimat*, they quickly fall into uncertain panic. They want to hold onto the old *Urheimat*, not to walk through the world alone and lonely. Consequently, they try to impose the identity of the *Urheimat* upon themselves, be it through nationalism or tribalism. A world that dwells solely in their memory, they try to revive, in an endless struggle that they can never win. They remain fettered here, cannot free themselves from the chains of this distorted impression of the past, and secretly feel ashamed that they are unable to escape this desolate situation. They bounce back and forth against the walls of their self-created prison and are thereby only filled with feelings of shame and envy. They look around and the people around them who are also on this journey seem to mock them. They can do nothing but reach for what seems to them the safest means to defend themselves: the identity of the *Urheimat* that they have imposed upon themselves. It is the only thing that is not foreign to them in this world. It must now be imposed on others, so that they can also force their feelings of shame and feelings of being lost upon them. They too must be as lost as they are, otherwise their place in the world is untenable and thus also their existence.

We see from anti-Semites, who believe that Judaism has no right to Heimat in the world, no matter in which country, because it has long since been displaced, that this idea only brings hatred and violence with it. To quote Adorno and Horkheimer again: "*instead of the voice of conscience it hears voices; instead of examining itself to take note of the protocol of its own lust for power, it attributes the Protocols of the Elders of Zion to others.[^8]*" This idea cannot be dissolved. People who must flee from their own country, whether because of war or the climate crisis, find themselves without any hope of a potential new Heimat, because those who cling firmly to this fragile idea deny them the ability to settle down and continue living in peace. They need the continued displacement of these people in order to be able to lay the foundation for their own existence. Because they also feel displaced from their *Urheimat* and therefore consider themselves powerless, they are filled with envy. As Adorno and Horkheimer wrote in the later added chapter of "Dialectic of Enlightenment": "*The thought of happiness without power is unbearable, because it would be happiness in the first place.*"[^9] They want the sympathy that one gives to the displaced. They want to seize that power which they believe to be in the possession of others. Whoever can prove themselves here in this devastating discord as the powerless party will be given the power[^10] and, since they erroneously cling to those outdated, feeble rules of being native, they imagine that they must also prove themselves here as the master, that they are even capable of proving themselves as the master, who still needs the bondsman in order to maintain his firm position. In this respect, they must prove themselves simultaneously as victim and master. They find themselves in a vicious circle that they can never break. Although they need power to preserve their place at the top of the power hierarchy, they cannot simply steal the supposed power of others without presenting themselves as powerless victims. They must sufficiently feign the suffering of the victim so that they can deceive the others. They then exploit this perfidious pretense to assert themselves and oppress those people who have rid themselves of the dead *Urheimat*.

We often see this attitude represented among the populist parties that, for example, are currently achieving an enormous number of votes in Europe. They speak of old times, of virtue, of Heimat and of old traditions that must be preserved. They appease this fetishization of the *Urheimat* that has spread. They try to alienate people who had to move, who have settled elsewhere, from their new Heimat. They drag along, among other things, ideals, images and clichés that are supposed to underpin their conception of the *Urheimat*. But they do not notice that what they are doing here can only disempower every attempt to revive the *Urheimat*. They create an image of a kind of land of plenty that is supposed to represent their true "Heimat", but in doing so they unwittingly rid themselves of the chance of a supposed return to this fabricated past, alienate themselves from their own Heimat with every step that drives them further into this disgraceful madness. The more complex their distorted image of the *Urheimat*, the more difficult the task of returning to it in the end becomes.

They naturally know in doing so that if this delusion does not persist, it would definitively endanger their existence. They must propagate it in order to continue to divide people, so that the foundation of their power does not crumble. If the person were to rid themselves of this fragile, trite concept of Heimat, they could ultimately face forward and look the future in the eye, without being afraid of what is yet to come. One does not necessarily have to forget the *Urheimat*. However, we wave the club around paranoid, in the attempt to defend our *Urheimat*, although it has long since died, and in doing so only hit ourselves. We merely have to overcome this in order to build a new, true Heimat. The direction of all hope is solely Heimat. It is not a place; it is rather a perspective, or a state in which one has freed oneself from all temporal, objective and even spatial characteristics. The feeling of security and at the same time adventure, like a child playing in the stream and knowing that its parents protect it from danger. It does not decay with the dissolution of borders or states and although it may seem tremendously difficult, it is attainable for all people on earth. Klaus Kufeld, the founding director of the Ernst Bloch Center, expressed it thus in his work "Heimat als Utopie": "*Perhaps it should be with Heimat as it is with hope. The hope that is always directed forward is not an affect for Ernst Bloch, not a pure feeling. For hope is only effective, sustainably effective, if it also withstands reality. Docta spes, the instructed, instructable hope, only becomes wise through disappointment. This hope is thought through the heart. Heimat alone as a backward-looking affect remains a diffuse feeling of Heimat, which so to speak gets stuck in the heart and sometimes gets caught there, crystallizes nostalgically. And nostalgic would mean: possibly losing the connection to reality. Politically exploited, but not ideologically captive,*  
*it now becomes a fighting term again. Heimat as a category of thought oriented toward the future does not deny feeling at all, for the emotion remains wise.*

*Only then does Heimat become a practiced human right.[^11]*"

I would like to add a poem here at this point in conclusion by the poet Johannes R. Becher (from whom I also took the title of this text). I find it fitting to the text:

*Heimat, my sorrow,*  
 *Land in twilight's glow,*  
 *Sky, you my blue one,*  
 *You, my happiness.*

*One day it will say:*  
 *When I was banished;*  
 *Have I, to praise you,*  
 *Sent you a song.*

*Was, to unite you,*  
 *Consecrated you a song,*  
 *And to weep with you*  
 *In the darkness ...*

*Sky shone, a blue one,*  
 *Peace returned –*  
 *Heimat, my sorrow,*  
 *You, my happiness.*

[^1]: Theodor W. Adorno, Minima Moralia, Suhrkamp Verlag, S. 35

[^2]: G.W.F. Hegel, Phänomenologie des Geistes, Reclam Verlag, S. 152

[^3]: G.W.F.Hegel: Phänomenologie des Geistes, Reclam Verlag S.158 könnte hier interessant sein.

[^4]: The laws of that country naturally apply here, but since these apply to everyone, it is unnecessary to consider them here.

[^5]: Heinrich Heine, Die schesischen Weber https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Die\_schlesischen\_Weber

[^6]: Theodor W. Adorno, Max Horkheimer, Dialektik der Aufklärung

[^7]: Ernst Bloch, Das Prinzip Hoffnung, S.1628

[^8]: Max Horkheimer, Theodor W. Adorno, Dialektik der Aufklärung, Philosophische Fragmente, Frankfurt am Main 1969, S.208-209

[^9]: Theodor W. Adorno und Max Horkheimer, Elemente des Antisemitismus \- Grenzen der Aufklärung

[^10]:As the notorious excuse "I was just following orders!" shows us. Someone is supposed to have acted without free will and therefore is not guilty of the consequences of his actions. One must forgive him his misdeeds, since he was "powerless" at the time of committing them.

[^11]: Klaus Kufeld, Heimat als Utopie


First published on 03.02.2026
Second publishing on 05.02.2026