<!-- pair: Beste-Buben -->

# The best of what you know, you cannot tell to boys

Thoughts that slip from the mighty hands of language are indeed unformulatable, but are they not simultaneously formulated? Is their _terminus ad quem_ not their grasping, but the very moment of their thinking? "Only those thoughts are true which do not understand themselves." Are those unformulatable thoughts, therefore, not the truest among them? And language, in turn—is it the Last Judgment? No; the Last Judgment is that very "formulability" which censures thoughts with the penalty of ideologization. The measure of all truth is then not its explainability to everyone; rather, this is the measure of all crude ideologization; *Full fathom five thy father **lies**.* 
Those thoughts must constantly develop and flow, like the water within a plant that perpetually leads to new foliage. Those new buds that develop from it, feeding on the plant’s water, eventually become fruits. Does this fruit then equal the original plant from which it sprouted? The absolute plant? Precisely therein lies their unformulability. They continue to grow, entangling themselves in an infinite, lush web, while one dares the attempt to explain them into exhaustion, into barrenness. They do not allow their peculiar identity to be extinguished.Identity must not collapse into the identical. The invisibility of truth does not indicate a deficiency in its place, but rather conditions its growth. The invisible relentlessly thrashes against the visible. A seamless process of thinking is not the sign of a true thought, but that of a true ideology. One must immerse oneself in the stream of thoughts, not linger on the shore in deliberation. Knowledge enlivens confusion; confusion, in turn, enlivens knowledge. 
The _terminus ad quem_ is merely the _terminus ante quem_; **thinking never arrives**. The true tips over into the untrue, passing over once more into its opposite. 
"*The best of what you know, you cannot tell to boys.*"