<!-- pair: Trauen-Geist -->

# On the Trust of the Mind — Or the Mistrust Thereof


One must maintain a critical stance toward the trust one places in one's own thinking. The ambivalence of one’s own thinking must consist in questioning all thinking. This is no appeal for cynicism, which can only propagate itself as willfully ignorant or merely naive. Positivism, on the other hand, cannot be accepted either, for it must place too much trust in its own methods and truths in order to sustain itself; the tools of thinking leave too great a trace upon the object that was thought. The paradox of pure mistrust is that, at some point, one must place trust in mistrust itself in order to be able to continue thinking. Mistrust becomes a divine figure of one's thinking, which one is unable to defeat. What drives thinking forward is neither trust nor mistrust, but the negation of mistrust. The negation of trust is mistrust, whereas the negation of mistrust proves to be something else—the negation of the negation, a third, elevated [aufgehobene] possibility within the false dichotomy of trust; a tension that cannot be dissolved, nor should it be allowed to dissolve. Thinking that finds itself suspended in that tension between these two opposites cannot stagnate. The rigidity of a thinking that allows itself universal statements about truth inevitably reveals itself in hindsight as rigor mortis.

To foster living, flowing thinking, it is not enough to negate the rigid, beheld corpse of thought; the latter does not flip back into the living. One must, first and foremost, not allow thinking to die in its eternal flow. The cold of the dogmatic winter must not freeze the river, nor must one dam the river by falling into the trap of claiming to see no shore. To avoid dogmatism entirely, one must subsequently perform a tightrope walk that runs across the abyss of absolute knowledge. Absolute knowledge may only exist insofar as it means that one recognizes the limits of one's own being, hence its contradictions, and consequently elevates them within oneself—that is, those contradictions are preserved [bewahrt], not dissolved and transferred into the Absolute as congruent. The eradication of the non-identical means the eradication of the identical. Without contradictions, thinking would emerge as completely inept. The non-identical drives the movement of the current forward. The mighty river does not flow straight ahead; its course shows how it has indeed over-come its contradictions, yet elevated and preserved [aufhob] them nonetheless; the shore does not serve to constrain it, but to give it direction—without which it would have no power. Yet to delight in its own magnificent divinity constitutes the vitium exitiale of that thinking. Any eradication of a being's contradictions forcibly denies it a part of its identity. The absoluteness of a thinking is, in this respect, not equal to absoluteness. Absolute knowledge can only arise as long as it remains unabsolute. An elevation [Aufhebung] that stems from within, but does not culminate in a final result, but rather in an infinite process of elevations [Aufhebungen]. The river of this thinking continues to carry yesterday's water, but tomorrow's rain as well.

"*He*: It’s six of one and half a dozen of the other! Ice blossoms or ones made of starch, sugar, and cellulose—both are nature, and the question remains for which nature is most to be praised.

Your inclination, friend, to inquire after the objective, after so-called truth, to suspect the subjective, pure experience, as worthless, is truly philistine and something to be overcome. You see me, therefore I am to you. Is it worth asking if I really am? Is not real what works, and is truth not experience and feeling? What elevates you, what increases your feeling of strength and power and domination—damn it, that is the truth, and even if seen from a virtuous angle it were ten times a lie."

That everything is equally valid [gleich gültig] inevitably collapses into the indifference [Gleichgültigkeit] of everything; in the Garden of Eden there is truth, but nevertheless the serpent.



The quoted passage in the second half of the text is from the novel "Dr Faustus" by Thomas Mann. The speaker, "he", is no other than the devil himself.